## Opening statements

Aaron opened with: The primary issue with small molecule crystallography is the limited number of Bragg reflection measured per pattern. Determining the orientation of each crystal using as few as 3 reflections per shot is a challenging task. Various methods exist (Brewster 2015??, SPIND Chufeng Li 2017???, PinkIndexer 2020) but all pose unique challenges. A recent paper demonstrating small molecule crystallography done at SACLA and LCLS made use of the CCTBX Sparse Indexer (Brewster 2015), and this paper demonstrated the ability to routinely do serial small molecule crystallography at an XFEL.

Dan opened with: One of the issues with serial crystallography in general is the relatively higher R-factors achieved upon structure optimization, compared to the rotation method. This is especially evident in small molecule crystallography where structure solution is obtained directly, and where the R-factors reported in (Schrieber and Paley 2021) are 10-15%, several % higher than standard small molecule crystallography structure solutions (usually 3-5 %). Nevertheless, the ability to do serial small mol routinely is exciting especially for materials science research, where usually samples are messy and as a result experiments are currently limited to powder diffraction. Serial small mol provides a way to get more information from these samples, but in the matsci and synthetic chem world, in order for serial small mol to be of use, it needs to be made into a “crystallography service” of sorts, where researchers can mail-in samples and results can be delivered back. Ideally, one day of mail-in services could accommodate dozens of chemists, this would have the potential  to radically transform matsci. Of course this should be done in liu of solving the R-factor gap method, in order to achieve the best possible results. However this R-factor gap problem pertains to the whole of serial crystallography. 


Elyse opened with: One of the benefits of doing small mol serial is that samples usually come in high volume, and generally have greater resistance to radiation damage compared to biological samples. Further, they are generally robust when physically handling them (how true is this for all the variety of samples??). High frame rates are great for these high volume samples, and this is the general direction where XFEL science is heading. Also, many materials undergo interesting reactions in short time-scales (e.g. fs, ps, ns) making them ideal for time-resolved SFX. 

Mark opened with: In the realm of fixed target serial synchrotron crystallopraphy, exciting developments are underway in E-field, laser and, gas initiated experiments allow us to follow structural changes. Coupled to this are novel detector technologies designed to intricately isolate exposures with 10 ns time-resolution. This allows for seamless execution of single-pump, multi-probe type experiments simply by controlling the readout settings for the detector. Recently small-wedge serial has shown advantages over traditional fixed-target serial, however the added information content afforded by small-wedge method comes at the cost of longer experiment duration. One of the main benefits of small wedge serial with respect to small molecule crystallography is that the wedge rotation brings more spots into the detection field, increasing the probability of hit indexing (which is generally low for small molecule serial, meaning only a few percent of hits are actually indexed( cite Schriber Paley paper). Optimizing small wedge serial at synchrotrons seems like a good goal considering Dans point above about a mail-in model being something the small molecule chemists would desire the most. 

## Questions and discussions

**Are there opportunities for funding aimed at developing small molecule serial?** Since protein crystallography came first, many of the experiments involving small molecule crystallography piggyback on developments made for protein crystallography, however there are gaps that have needed addressing (and still need addressing), for example the above-mentioned indexing problem. We think there is sufficient room for funding to develop this technique. 

**What resolutions matter most for small molecule?** Typically, the desired resolution is 0.8 Angstrom, and anything beyond is highly specific. When considering X-ray sources for small molecules, higher energies (~60 keV) and broad bandwidth (e.g., pink beam) would give more reflections per shot, leading to better indexing and higher resolution data.

**Which indexers work for sparse data?** CCTBX has a sparse indexing algorithm (Brewster 2015), SPIND (not discussed in session, but it exists), (pinkIndexer 2020). These generally require knowledge of unit cell. Pink Indexer has not necessarily been applied to sparse data, but its theoretical minimum number of spots needed to index is 2. However it also takes a long time (60 seconds). However, even if it takes 60 seconds per frame, this seems reasonable. More work needs to be done to optimize indexing regardless. 

**What about diffuse scattering in small molecule / sparse diffraction data? **The EMC algorithm can determine the orientation of diffuse / sparse patterns and could have interesting potential for processing sparse data.

**Does small wedge fixed target help solve the above-mentioned R-factor gap problem? **Small wedges improve the R-factors (e.g. Rpim). Small wedges mitigate the partiality problem and also lead to better indexing accuracy. However this comes at the cost of time.

**How many crystals are needed, and how big of a wedge rotation?** A shown example reportedly used 400 wells, achieved a 40% hit rate (160 crystals), with 2 degree oscillations per well. 

**How long does this usually take?** The reported 400-well experiment took an estimated 12 minutes (about 1.8 seconds per crystal with 2-degree oscillations). Without rotation, sampling all 400 wells would take about 10 seconds total (0.025 sec per crystal). However to get the same quality structure from no-rotation sampling, it would require maybe 25,000 wells (is that right?). 

**Can you comment on crystal characteristics for successful serial wedge experiments?** It seems that crystal batches engineered to have similar sizes yield best results, but this is mainly when doing time-resolved studies. Actually, for single structure studies, working with messy crystal powders would be fine, as long as the particle size is greater than 5-10 microns or so. 

**Are XFELS perhaps well suited to investigate samples that make messy powders of small crystals?** Based on the work from Schieber and Paley it seems this is the case. Most of the samples they used were from messy powders. They were able to make huge quantites and run the GDVN which has speeds on the order of 60 m / s , able to keep up with high frame rate experiments. 

**What has the general experience been with sample deliver of small molecule samples at XFELS?** For the jet work done at XFELs, we re-suspend the small molecule samples in methanol or detergent solutions for optimal jetting. It seems most of the sample delivery hardware was developed at the XFELs to accommodate protein samples. Some solvents were known to react with the GDVN in disruptive ways. This touches on the point above about there being new opportunities for development grants for small molecule serial work both at XFELs and synchrotrons. 

**What are some of the solvent/sample limitations for sample grids?** Samples are prepared in a small vacuum, thick or viscous solvents help, but there are no known limitations. Usually if your sample is happy in air, then it will be happy on a grid. Also, preferential orientation is a somewhat common known thing, but it isn’t a show-stopper, and of course more common when there are e.g. needle-shaped crystals. SACLA has experience auto processing needle-shaped crystals through their serial small wedge pipeline (5-50 micron sized needles). 

**Is there desire for a data processing statistic that gauges preferential orientation?** There is interest, and work towards this is already underway (e.g., work from R Gildea?). Also, a specific CC1/2 calculation could be used to gauge preferential orientation. 

**How quickly can a grid be made, and is it scalable for high throughput experiments?** It seems that making grids will always be slower than putting crystals on loops, but putting crystals on loops is only for certain kinds of crystals. For example, small messy powders cannot be put into loops, and simply putting them into a grid is much easier. It seems that grids offer many advantages, because putting small crystals into grids avoids clogging of jets with small molecules. It seems that grid samples can be prepared in minutes, maybe faster.

**What would serial look like at Megahertz rep-rates? **There you would likely be limited to the GDVN, however with proper sample conditions and adequate sample, GDVN can run at 60 m/s and this is fast enough to refresh sample in the interaction region between pulses even at super high rep rates (forgot the exact numbers). For protein samples, running a GDVN for several days at 60 m/s requires potentially a gram of protein (double check number), which is daunting, but not so for small molecules where samples generally come in large quantities. This all makes high rep-rate small mol appealing.

**Are there challenges or considerations with respect to the data at high resolution from small molecule crystals?** The data are more difficult to model at high resolution due to the inaccuracies in the indexing (mentioned above). However, it’s important to note that the small molecule crystals diffract well, and the Bragg peaks are typically full of photons even out to the edges of the detector. So a large emphasis should be placed on better orientation determination and modeling of small molecule data, to enhance extraction of the data from the Bragg peaks. 

**What time scales make most sense for time-resolved small molecule experiments?** It seems that many reactions happen in the femto to pico second range because many excited states in these materials only last that long.

## Gaps / Conclusions
* R-factors are ~10% worse in serial small molecule when compared to rotation small molecule. 
* Indexing small molecule data is still hard, but current programs "work". Modeling the high resolution data would perhaps benefit from more accurate indexing programs.
* Hardware developed for protein serial crystallography has been adapted for small molecule serial. Development grants are warranted to make small molecule serial specific beamline hardware.
* For chemists and materials scientists, mail-in crystallography orders make the most sense, where dozens of samples can be shipped to the XFEL or synchrotron. This is how to get the method to catch on: small molecule crystallography as a service. 
* Small molecule samples are generally made in high volume amounts, and undergo reactions on the fs-ps timescales, and this makes them well suited for high frame rate time resolved studies at XFELs. 
* We want to aim for routine 0.8 Angstrom small molecule structures with low 3-5% R-factors. 

