# XFEL Sample Delivery (General/Intro)

Summrazyed by session notetaker, Elyse Schriber

Generally, XFEL facilities offer partial complete to partial staff support for sample delivery at serial crystallography beamtimes (aside from SACLA, where there is very little staff support and users primarily run the experiment). The question posed to the user audience was, do serial crystallography users at XFELs want to be trained on sample delivery for their samples, as opposed to having staff manage sample delivery completely? 

XFELs and synchrotrons have very different levels of staff support, XFELs are almost always staffed during an SFX experiment, whereas synchrotron SX beamlines might be minimally staffed, or users may be able to fully operate the endstation without beamline staff presence the entire beamtime.

Are the KHz repetition rates being offered as part of the LCLS-II upgrade useful for serial crystallography needs? (Meta comment: Small-molecule SX benefits greatly from the higher rep rates, as most materials and chemical microcrystals can be produced in bulk powder form so there is no concern for sample consumption. Using KHz repetition rates at European XFEL resulted in 5 structures from one beamtime, even with challenging sample delivery conditions.)

What is the status on outreach and documentation for users? What is generally useful and how much effort should be made to improve outreach and documentation regarding sample delivery.

Serial crystallography as a method is challenging and experiments can either work or not work, but sample delivery is a significant limiting factor for experiment success. The limited availability of XFEL beamtime makes sample delivery working during an experiment a necessity.  It is a critical bottleneck that gets even more complicated when the SFX experiment moves into the time-resolved area, where the introduction of a ligand or excitation by a laser induces structural changes in the sample of interest that exist in short time intervals. Some examples include mix-and-inject experiments and specialized laser-pump/probe experiments. The goal is to see sample delivery move from an art to a science.

Right now, SFX sample delivery is “Jets, Drives, and Fixed Targets,” where many different sample delivery options exist at different facilities and in different groups. At LCLS, the focus is supporting user experiments by providing as many options as possible, based on sample needs and experimental design. This also means allowing users to bring their own sample delivery systems and work with them to ensure compatibility with the endstation and even make modifications to the endstation configuration to be more compatible with the user-developed sample delivery system. Currently, the newest available sample delivery options at LCLS are the Polypico and Scienion droplet-on-demand systems (acoustic ejection/piezoelectric ejector system), brought on by user demand. They are still in the R&D phase but will be ready for regular user operations soon.  With this many options and the unique needs for each experiment, is standardization even an option for SFX sample delivery?

The limited availability of hard X-ray XFEL facilities around the world (5 total) requires shipping of sensitive biological samples that can only be made in very small quantities, often requiring significant labor from the user group. Shipping can damage the samples, change them, or render them completely useless. The Center for Structural Dynamics in Biology, an NIH supported collaboration with LCLS and others, seeks to solve these problems. They are working on solutions to the logistics of sample shipping, especially international shipping where customs can be a damaging and time-consuming bottleneck.  They are also developing and improving methods to prepare the samples for shipment and determining the best methods to ship these types of samples without destroying them.

# Synchrotron/Mix-and-Inject Operations/Hardware Development

In contrast to SFX at XFEL facilities, very little mix-and-inject hardware is bespoke at the SX beamline at CHESS. Many parts and hardware can also be attached and adapted to various beamline at synchrotrons and XFELs. Hardware standardization is not the main challenge, operating them successfully is the challenge and making on-the-fly changes/adjustments during the beamtime itself. If there is very little user support (expected at a synchrotron), this becomes very difficult or next to impossible for users without experience and training. The mixers used at CHESS are flow focus diffusive mixers (I would recommend CAD drawing/schematic/figure here). These mixers require microcrystals to trigger reactions via diffusion of small molecules. The smaller the crystal, the more likely it is that the reaction is triggered completely in each crystal, and there isn’t presence of unreacted species in the diffraction data. At BioCARs, mixing experiments can be be performed at a 10 Hz repetition rate using gas dynamic virtual nozzle (GDVN) type mixers. 
What is missing from mixing experiments is pre-characterization and identification of the right samples and small molecules for the experiments. Is there characterization that is missing, i.e., finding the right solvent to solubilize the small molecules without destroying the biological sample. 

# Needs for Sample Delivery

Fixing some of the limitations in sample delivery and developing characterization and analysis methods for sample delivery systems is an active area of research and development. Outreach and documentation are a weakness that needs to be fixed. There is not enough documentation on the “why do a static serial crystallography experiment or a time-resolved experiment.” The user community seems to also only be aware of serial crystallography at XFELs and is not as aware of the opportunities and capabilities at the synchrotrons or how they can use them. Synchrotrons are also easier to access than XFELs and the energy barrier is lower, so more groups can be introduced to serial methods via synchrotrons. The general user community is also not aware of the various ways that samples can be manipulated and the types of sample delivery that can be employed. Beamline staff do participate in outreach with the user community, but they may need to adjust the way they interact with the user community. Figure out the best way to direct users to the right method for their sample needs or their experimental goals. There can be frustration from users who go and do a more complicated experiment because it is what was available to them, when there are easier options available.

The responsibility for making sample delivery more efficient and useful is on the beamline staff, not on the users. A lot of improvements to automate certain processes could also reduce the presence of staff at a beamtime and reduce the burden on staff at facilities. A GUI for setting laser or mixing delay times and switching lasers in five minutes to make experiments more efficient (meta comment: not sure if this is in regards to time points, fluence or actual laser being switched?). Speed up experiment prep, alignment, configuration, and tear down at the beamline to improve accessibility and more efficiency.

At the MFX endstation at LCLS, fixed target data collection was fully autonomous during COVID-19 (mail-in type system). Use wasted time more efficiently, if an experiment is failing at one beamline, have fixed target samples ready to go to take advantage of available beamtime.

Realtime data analysis/data processing feedback, do we have a complete dataset? Determining if there are multiple lattices in the single shots, usually an indication of overconcentration. What are the best sample delivery settings to use during an experiment? If real time data processing was available, then BL staff and users could make more informed decisions about switching samples, abandoning a sample, and would use the beamtime more efficiently. “No photons wasted.”

Specific standardization goals or needs, smaller chips for fixed target serial crystallography that can be used with a standard cryogenic cooler used in rotation crystallography, so that it can stay could as it is translated and prevent radiation damage. Chips that can fit into the grips of robots (rotation/loop puck type standardization seen in rotation crystallography).

The journal, Frontiers in Structural Biology’s scope includes in-situ (intra-cellular) structures and dynamics, specifying catalytic intermediates, stable and meta stable intermediates, and conformational plasticity from ligand binding, catalysis, environmental parameters as their key structural interests. This journal’s scope is a good sales pitch for serial crystallography because there are many experimental opportunities now available because of upgrades at endstations and light source facilities to produce research that fits exactly into the journal’s scope.

LAMA, Liquid Application Method for time-resolved Analysis (mixing time-resolved experiments). This system circumvents photo-caged compounds and is the simplest way to perform reaction initiation. Picoliter droplets of ligand are shot on every crystal, low kcat allows for in-crystal diffusion, required material per chip is only 1-2 μL of ligand, and the diffusion time for 20x20x20 μm crystal is 10-15 milliseconds.

What types of new science can be done with crystallography? Multi-dimensional experiments, vary environmental conditions like pH, temperature, electric field, and pressure. Multi-modal experiments can be performed like simultaneous spectroscopy/serial XRD. Taking a more integrative approach, where TR-serial crystallography is combined with NMR, molecular dynamics simulations, QM/MM calculations, and electron microscopy.

Can we make time-resolved serial crystallography simpler? The clear path to simplifying TR-SX is to get users invested in static serial crystallography first, and then implement time-resolved studies into already existing experiments or use a method that can rapidly test conditions. LAMA can be used to screen TR-SX conditions like in-situ mixing and crystal kinetics from crystals with a poor size/diffraction ratio in a controlled environment. Exploiting existing high-throughput infrastructure makes the methods faster and more reliable. The more reliable and simple data collection becomes, the more complex the experimental goals become, like multi-temperature experiments. Most biological experiments are performed at room temperature (20-25°C) even though many interesting biological processes occur at physiological temperatures. Multi-temperature experiments under physiological conditions open new experimental possibilities. Specific humidity to improve diffraction quality, the ability to modulate enzyme kinetics, protein dynamics as a function of energy, experimental free energy landscape of enzyme catalysis, and experimental determination of rate-limiting steps.

# Sample Delivery Challenges

Important challenges to consider are to remain critical about the work itself, are the efforts made to perform the experiment worth the results that we get every time? Technical challenges include ensuring that users are informed of how much sample is necessary to complete their experiment, but also that crystals are not being wasted during sample preparation for the experiment. Sample loss can also occur during the experiment if pre-characterization of sample behavior is not tested before the beamtime, both ligand and the crystal slurry. This includes characterizing the sample delivery system behavior itself during the experiment to make sure the experiment is performing as planned. If you were to use a piezoelectric or acoustic droplet ejector, are the droplets ejecting well?  If the experiment is time-resolved is the timing accurate? In the case of XFEL, is the delivery of the crystals well synchronized to the delivery of the XFEL pulses. Is the experimental set up prone to introducing bias that produce false positive results? Many times, surprises occur at the beamtime that require changes the experiment on the fly, this can be a result of minor changes to the sample delivery installation and unknown changes at the facility that have profound effects on the quality of the experiment.
At the XFEL, time pressure requires experiments to be as efficient as possible. The best-case scenario is that sample delivery is working as expected, the sample is diffracting, the real time feedback is working, and data processing is working well. This best-case scenario is the same for synchrotrons, with less time pressure because there are more synchrotrons and available beamtime.

# User Questions and Comments

Users report that communication from staff and developers is a weak point for serial methods. The questions that developers then have for the user community is, do they want to be involved at all experiments or take a step back and allow developers and beamline staff run experiments primarily. In some cases, user involvement is necessary when the experiments become more complicated.

Research group driven developments for sample delivery are not the same as commercial companies, and do not have the manpower or technology to mass produce and sell to the serial methods community. Why is outsourcing to an engineering firm or fabrication company not done for common sample delivery methods? Is it too difficult and complicated? Not enough available companies to work with?

A user ready beamline is the end goal for time-resolved SX and fixed-target sample delivery could be advantageous for this. It is more intuitive, easy to work with, and easy to use. This kind of beamline could allow for user independent data collection.

User questions about the LAMA system, how do you validate that each droplet hits a crystal? How do you quantify whether the method is working? Are there any validation steps? Would you look at electron density changes in the crystal structures, compared to solution scattering data, some type of complimentary result.

The LAMA system relies on accurate alignment of the ligand nozzle onto the fixed target chip, and the precision of the droplets is determined by that alignment. Water sensitive paper is used to ensure that there is full fixed target chip coverage, and every feature on the chip that has a crystal, has a droplet, providing active feedback for ligand coverage.

Biologists are concerned about wasting sample from proteins that can often take long periods of time to express and crystallize. There is a strong correlation between success with the X-rays and pre-testing before a beamtime, so a big question is how do we perform pre-beamtime tests that provide useful information and preserve sample? During an experiment, filtration can help improve results, but it also results in sample loss. Users have to weigh the cost of wasting sample due to clogging and salt crystals or filtration and pre-testing to improve results.

At the synchrotron, sample does not get wasted, as most of the microcrystals do not end up being placed in sample reservoirs, but crystals do have a finite lifetime, both in diffraction quality and settling out of suspension. Is temperature control near the interaction region causing crystal deterioration? Is the anti-settler causing damage to the crystals?

Why are samples that can produce crystals of 50 microns not being brought to a synchrotron? (Depends on experimental goals, time-resolved metalloprotein studies using XES require XFEL pulse duration). This opens up another line of questioning, if staff at beamlines are consulting users, and realize that there is a better sample delivery method available for the experimental goals or even a better X-ray source, should they send users towards that method or source?

# Time-Resolved Experiments

Fixed target experiments at the XFEL require a significant amount of time spent doing alignment. The cameras used to do the alignment are low resolution and the lighting in the chamber (vacuum or helium) is not great, in-line cameras would be better for alignment but building out specialized optics may not be feasible in certain beamline configurations. Then, there is the importance of beam position diagnostics to make sure that the XFEL beam is being tracked due to its intrinsic instability.

Do synchrotrons have better optics than FELs, is fixed target time resolved SX easier at a synchrotron?

How can sample preparation be optimized for a time resolved SX experiment? Sample homogeneity is extremely important for all time-resolved serial studies, and it can be very difficult to get homogenous samples, how does heterogeneity affect diffusion times in ligand-binding time-resolved experiments? Are XFELs more sensitive to size heterogeneity than a synchrotron for both experiment success and sample delivery?

Using the LAMA chip system, heterogeneity is not a problem for sample delivery itself, but more for rate initiation, which then causes the electron density maps to become blurry and difficult to analyze as they are now a superposition of many different states due to variable initiation rates.
Time-resolved maps are blurry regardless of the error propagation in a multi-step reaction, if you are ever going to see any population that lasts a long time. Need states to last longer. If your error propagation is larger than your transient state changes, the experiment ends up not working.

There should be a comprehensive comparison of mix and inject experiment at FEL vs synch. If electron density could be used as metric to determine if temporal resolution and pulse duration is really worth it, would that be useful to help users make informed decisions about what type of source they would use for a time-resolved experiment?

# Sample Shipping

Working with customs or having some sort of internal connection to customs agents would be useful. This ensures that samples are quickly transported to the facility before the experiment or to prevent sample degradation from occurring in improper conditions. This is especially relevant.

It is equally important to ship samples early and not ship anything last minute. If the samples are highly unstable and cannot be stored, the next best option is to grow the crystals onsite. The argument against this is that many crystals require a specialized protocol that is not easily repeatable at another facility without special instruments and tools. Determining how much sample you need to make and how long it will take is another necessary component to experimental success. Some audience members suggested growing crystal seeds at users’ home facilities and then shipping those, where crystal growth would be completed at the facility. This removes some of the stress of having to express protein and purify at the light source facility. At SSRL, there is already a specialized container for shipping samples that is both temperature controlled and fully compatible with storing standard microplates for fixed target SX. These boxes can maintain a 15-20ºC temperature constant and keep the crystals protected in their mother liquor. These boxes can also be used with the MFX beamline at LCLS. The box can be used for different types of samples and sample delivery methods outside of protein microcrystals and fixed target sample delivery, the important part is that the environment the crystals are in is controlled from shipment to delivery at the beamline.
