# Recognising the Differences Between XFEL and Synchrotron Serial Crystallography

Derived from the [raw transcript](./TRANSCRIPT.md) captured by Iris Young during the discussion.

## Observations

TBD

## Panel

- Jeney Wierman
- Kunio Hirata
- Robin Owen
- Artem Lyubimov

## Opening Comments

Jeney opened by reminding people that she previously worked at SSRL in the SMB group, across MFX at LCLS and SSRL MX beamlines: this highlighted the value in having synchrotron beamlines which mirror the XFEL beamlines directly (e.g. similar sample handling) - access to synchrotron time is a lot easier than XFEL though so you should think about doing your experiments there unless you really can't - talk to beamline scientists to help motivate why you need an XFEL when you come to apply for time. The synchrotron and XFEL experiments are conceptually similar but in both cases a barrier is processing stills, with the additional complexities for XFEL.

Kunio opened with his background as a beamline scientists at a microfocus beamline at SPring8, and his interest in automating data collection. He took part in XFEL experiments at SACLA back in 2013-4 performing radiation damage-free studies metalloproteins, where huge (500µm) crystals of PSII were used and around 1,000 still shots per data set were processed individually with MOSFLM. They then moved on to a different time resolved analysis, SFROX, at room temperature with (again) large crystals, laser excitation and rotation between images (a combination which is unique to SACLA.) This allows time periods of ns to µs between laser and X-ray pulses, at 30Hz, with a very high brightness and short (<10fs) pulse length. This needs an automated pipeline to keep up with data collection, to give live feedback which is as complete and informative as possible. XFEL experiments need a _lot_ of people (this is a well understood problem) who need to work hard and around the clock in a coordinated manner. Standardising on some areas would simplify, as would routinely testing at synchrotron before using very scarse XFEL time.

Robin identified several main areas of contrast between synchrotron and XFEL areas of research from the perspective of a beamline staff member at Diamond Light Source (DLS). These can be roughly summarized as (1) properties of the beamtime from an administrative/logistical standpoint, including availability of beamtime, frequency and duration; (2) execution and constraints of the experiment itself, such as sample delivery method, appropriate choices of experiments and timescales (as applicable), and the degree to which work at the beamline is or can be automated or standardized; (3) X-ray damage; and (4) data processing, including the greater need for real-time feedback during XFEL experiments as compared with synchrotron experiments.

Art, a researcher at SSRL/SLAC, described how his experience first as a user (i.e. experimentalist visiting the beamline) at both types of facilities shaped the way he now approaches methods development and beamtime support. He noted that methods at XFEL and synchrotron sources are beginning to converge, for example with the adoption of liquid jets for serial sample delivery at several synchrotron beamlines, and conversely, the adoption of goniometers for fixed-target experiments at some XFEL beamlines. This convergence is aided by beam properties at later-generation synchrotrons growing to more closely resemble XFEL beams, as well as by ongoing efforts at both types of facilities toward standardization and automation. Art also noted, however, that the nature of the XFEL as a laser is a categorical difference that will not be made irrelevant by any number of hardware advancements, and therefore there will always be some types of experiments uniquely suited to the XFEL. 

## Questions and Discussion

Panelists and audience members acknowledged first of all that the convergence Art mentioned is the result of a recent increase in communication between the synchtrotron and XFEL fields. This communication was seen to be at least in part a response to feeling threatened by the increasing foothold of cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) in structural biology. Although cryoEM is not a new technique, its applicability at comparable resolutions to crystallography on biological samples very much is, and some in the crystallography community fear going extinct. Similarly, AlphaFold has very quickly gained a strong reputation for structure prediction that some researchers (and some grant reviewers) view as structure _solution_ and as a direct replacement for experimental techniques. (This panel and audience did not share that view.) The room appeared to be in agreement that cryoEM is an equal or better tool for some types of experiments, but not all, and that there are also experiments that cannot be carried out by cryoEM, including the entire range of room temperature experiments. As Art pointed out, even the technique known as "room temperature cryoEM" is, in fact, still conducted at cryogenic temperatures under liquid nitrogen, just using a much faster plunge-freezing step than what a standard vitribot is capable of. This quicker temperature change allows less time for particles to shift toward a new equilibrium, thereby capturing them in a distribution of conformations more closely resembling that at room temperature. Still, there is some perturbation that takes place during grid freezing across all cryoEM techniques, including conformational changes. Broadly speaking, Art continued, cryoEM is uniquely well suited to structures that cannot be induced to crystallize, including particularly floppy structures, and to studying a landscape of conformational states within a single experiment. The extent to which we can extract individual conformational states with crystallography is somewhat of an open question, but there are certainly relative strengths of each of the aforementioned methods, as well as NMR and others. They are all potentially complementary methods.

### Is the world done building XFELs?

The resounding answer was "no". Jeney posited that we will soon be building smaller ones, and clarified that she does not include compact free electron lasers (CFELs) as part of this category. Ray Sierra added that China among other places are still building new ones right now. The potential of the new facilities coming online -- and a noted advantage of locations like SLAC where multiple types of facilities are co-located -- may have more to do with allowing researchers to explore the full "decision tree" of methods available to approach their problems. SLAC has an XFEL, a synchrotron, and a cryoEM facility on the same campus, all supported by a large computing cluster capable of their collective data processing needs, including the use of AlphaFold in initial structure prediction. From Ray's perspective, serial crystallography doesn't even need to be outstanding as a solo technique -- it is already valuable as one of many tools in a structural biologist's toolbox. This is evidenced by its role during the early months of COVID as a component of many large-scale, cross-institution and multi-pronged efforts to develop drugs and vaccines. This attitude was echoed by several in the audience, who offered other cases where mutliple techniques were necessary to address a single question. 

### How can we best leverage these complementary techniques?

The typical serial crystallographer today trained first in rotation crystallography at a synchrotron, then advanced to include serial methods, and may or may not go on to eventually do XFEL experiments depending on the nature of their problem, noted Robin. There are only a few types of experiments that can only be done at XFELs, and you need to be doing one of those in order to get XFEL beam time, because of its extreme scarcity. The questions you answer with an XFEL are essentially limited to cases with very short timescales or where your sample is especially sensitive to radiation damage, so that even after your first image acquisition at a synchrotron, your sample would no longer reflect the structure you want to study. In addition to the difficulty of getting XFEL beamtime, Jeney pointed out that users often face a dearth of information as far as what options are available to them. An individual facility tends to be able to counsel a user on how to use their facility, but not where else to go to use a different technique and get a different kind of question answered. Graeme pointed out that it is possible within DLS to direct users to another part of the same facility with different capabilities, but acknowledges that cross-talk between separate institutions is more of a challenge. By comparison, Kunio Hirata noted that Japan is running a national program in structural biology that provides the resources for users to complete a given project with whatever methods and resources make sense, and facilitates the connections between the many institutions involved. This arrangement pairs experimentalists with experts in each method as well. Pierre Aller mentioned that the X-ray hub at DLS strives to fill this role for biological questions that can be answered with X-rays.

### What will we do with the incredibly high pulse rates of newer XFELs like LCLS-II and EuXFEL?

Graeme pointed out that nobody really knows what we could do at such frame rates. The physics of getting new sample into the beam, old sample out of the way, and reading signal off the detector are manageable at hundreds of Hz but a completely different ballgame at 100 kHz.
