Transcript summarized by session note taker, David Mittan-Moreau

New mandates from the US government will require the storage of data, consistent with FAIR principles, as part of funding requirements. This session sought to address the question of, what are the challenges when depositing multi-modal data from serial experiments, such that the deposition aligns with FAIR principles? The primary topics of discussion included, what is the purpose of archiving data? What constitutes “raw data”?  What are the barriers to deposition? How should multimodal data be deposited? And how can we structure data to best meet these needs?

Several possible views emerged on the topic of the purpose of archiving data. These include allowing other researchers to reproduce or access a study's results, improve upon the results or validate the methods used to arrive at the results, or for future methods development. Depositions are also important for beamlines as they are an indicator of the amount of science they are producing.

An interpretation of the new US government requirements is that for research performed using US government funds, the primary or raw data must be kept and made freely accessible. To that means, it is important to define what is primary, or raw data within serial crystallography. The most encompassing option is to keep all diffraction frames collected for the experiment. A commonly argued view was that we have too much raw data to save. Throwing out data or performing compression were identified as approaches to reduce the amount of data to be saved. There are different possibilities of what data can be deleted. These include blanks, or diffraction images that do not contain diffraction spots, and unindexable frames. Those in favor of keeping all the frames argued that would allow for improvement in the results with new methods or with the identification of missing data. Frames that are blank or unindexable are also informative to the experimental setup and crystal quality. Others felt that there is currently limited use of these frames and doubt that they will be useful in the future. There was also a view that only frames used to generate the results need to be retained because that is what is necessary for reproduction. Image compression is also a possible route to reduce data volumes. It was agreed that the most efficient form of compression is the indexing and integration process that produces unmerged structure factors. Arguments against this are that the indexing and integration process is a step that needs to be validated to verify the accuracy of experimental results. Others mentioned exploring the possibility of using standard image compression algorithms to reduce the volume of our data.

Participants agreed that human labor, on behalf of both the experimenters and the databases, is the primary obstacle to deposition. Experimenters pointed out that time demands to prepare and organize all of the information required to reproduce an XFEL experiment is nearly intractable. There are also no methods for depositing multimodal data, such as data from different experiments that are associated with the same structure. The difficulty is annotating the data in ways so the associations are clear. This is also a barrier to deposition of raw data, there is not a clear way to connect the structural results with the raw data. As demonstrated by lessons learned from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), the most expensive aspect of data storage is the cost to pay their employees who review depositions and verify the deposition quality and that the raw data actually corresponds to what it is supposed to. There are methods underway to reduce the burden of deposition. The PDB is working on tools that automatically extract relevant information from log-files to prepopulate fields for deposition. They also recently made command line tools available to automate repetitive depositions. While not the primary cost, the expense to store data is non-trivial. Participants seemed to agree that the most economical way to store data is on magnetic tapes and that copies need to be kept in multiple physical locations to protect it from physical damage.

